On 26 April 1986, Reactor No. 4 at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant exploded after tests on the reactor were done improperly and the operators lost control. This was due to a design flaw of the RBMK reactor, which made it unstable when operated at low power.[9][10]

Chernobyl city was evacuated soon after the disaster. The base of operations for the administration and monitoring of the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone was moved from Pripyat to Chernobyl. Chernobyl currently contains offices for the State Agency of Ukraine on the Exclusion Zone Management and accommodations for visitors. Apartment blocks have been repurposed as accommodations for employees of the State Agency. The length of time that workers may spend within the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone is restricted by regulations that have been implemented to limit radiation exposure.

The city has become overgrown and many types of animals live there. According to census information collected over an extended period of time, it is estimated that more mammals live there now than before the disaster.[11]

Although Chernobyl will remain uninhabitable for thousands of years due to elevated levels of background radiation, guided tours of the exclusion zone are possible.

In 2003, the United Nations Development Programme launched a project, called the Chernobyl Recovery and Development Programme (CRDP), for the recovery of the affected areas.[12] The program, initiated in February 2002, based its activities on the Human Consequences of the Chernobyl Nuclear Accident report recommendations. The main goal of the CRDP's activities is supporting the efforts of the Government of Ukraine to mitigate the long-term social, economic, and ecological consequences of the Chernobyl disaster. CRDP works in the four areas of Ukraine that have been most affected by the Chernobyl nuclear accident: Kiev Oblast, Zhytomyrska Oblast, partially Kiev, Chernihivska Oblast, and Rivne Oblast.In 2016 the "New Safe Containment Shield" was placed on the damaged reactor to stop the flow of radiation. As of today you can visit Chernobyl but there are strict rules. You will pass areas of high radiation and you can't go in the buildings.